---
title: "Living Memory"
date: 2021-10-16
layout: project
materials:
    - Water
    - Alpine butterwort (Pinguicula alpina)
    - strobe light
    - wet suit
location: 
time: 16.10.2021
---

A multisensory experience for one person.

This research-based performative experience asks questions about the
memory of a place and about memory\'s place in culture, as well as
individually in each of us. What does it mean to remember that, which
has been submerged in the past? How important is physical pace in the
preservation of a memory? Can our memories, like plant species,
disappear altogether if they lose their habitat?

Like it did happen to alpine butterwort (*Pinguicula alpina*), a rare
carnivorous plant that lived on the northern side of Staburags cliff in
Latvia since the last ice age (some 14,000--12,000 years ago). It was
this plant's only natural growth. After the cliff was flooded due to the
construction of the Hydroelectric Power Plant in 1965 there were
attempts to transplant the alpine butterwort to Raunas Staburags but
since 2008 this plant, which lived in Latvia all these years, went
extinct.

This also means that the genetic information and the memory of this
plant, that was acquired through the experience living within these
climatic circumstances, through interaction with other species and the
freshwater limestone that came from the Staburags cliff is also gone
with it. There are also now only a few people living, bearing the memory
of Staburag's cliff.

Remembering is a creative process that involves our imagination.
Sometimes it means diving into dark waters where almost nothing is
visible. The brain network that is responsible for remembering is also
responsible for the imagination. The way we look to the past largely
determines our future trajectory.

Currently, the alpine butterwort in Latvia grows only in special
laboratory conditions. The alpine butterwort of Latvian origin has
disappeared completely. The alpine butterwort currently grown in the
National Botanical Garden comes from seeds harvested in Estonia.

Part of cycle of events "Ecosystem of Change" Latvian Centre for
Contemporary Art, curated by Ieva Astahovska

Scientist Dace Kļaviņa, National Botanical Garden, Latvia

Soundscape by Maksims Šenteļevs

Performer Mingaile Kola

Thanks to Daiga Jamonte and Museum of Botany, University of Latvia for
lending the last herbarium of alpine butterwort collected at the
Staburags cliff by Gaida Ābele.

Photos: Didzis Grodzs
